We are here in chapter 9.
This is some of the latest,
most cutting edge parts of CSS.
And we encountered a problem earlier in
this course as we were laying out some of
our webpages and we wound up making
something that looked like this.
So we had some titles that we're wrapping,
we had images that we're doing strange
things, nothing really quite lined up.
Our cards are just totally fine,
they were coded in the right way, but
because we have different
numbers of words,
we wind up with some of these
wrapping kinds of issues.
To this point in time,
there has been no way for
us to fix those particular problems.
We could try fixing those cards by
using some kind of fixed height for
all of those items, for a fixed height,
for our headline, a fixed height for
our image, and
a fixed height for our button.
But if you've been around
web development long enough,
you know that fixed heights
are generally a really bad idea.
You never know how many words somebody
is going to want to put in in that
particular space.
So, generally speaking, fixed heights
are something you wanna avoid.
So how on earth do we fix this problem?
Well, the answer is
a thing called subgrid.
And what subgrid is going to do,
is you remember the way these
cards were put together.
We had actually two grid
systems that were going on.
We had one grid system that
was laying out each card,
and we had one grid system that laid
the cards out on the page, right?
So now what we're going to do is we're
going to take our cards and we're going to
ask the cards to look at the underlying
grid that's controlling the page,
thus subgrid.
And if our card elements are in line
with the grid underlying the page,
then everything is going
to line up perfectly.
That is the theory, okay?
And if that makes your head explode,
no worries.
We'll go through a bunch
of examples of this.
So let's start here with
the exploring sub grid activity.
And if we take a look
here at our code pen,
you'll see that I have put
together a series of cards.
One card has a picture in it.
It's got a paragraph of text and a button.
All of the other cards have
different amounts of headline text,
different amounts of card text,
and a button associated with them.
And if we take a look at
the structure of these cards,
we have a series of divs here.
So we have our container and then we
have a series of cards inside of that.
They have two classes each.
Card is one of the classes and then
a number is the other class, one, two,
three, four and five.
Inside each card,
every card but the first one,
we have a headline,
a paragraph, and a button.
In the first card we have a headline,
an image, a paragraph, and a button.
That's what we've got going on.
We'd like everything to line up and
look pretty.
It's not currently doing that.
So what can we do to fix this problem?
So, first of all,
what we can do is, let's see if we
can make our cards line up
by using our card class.
And we would do something
like display grid,
grid-template-rows, or sorry,
grid-template-columns, 1fr, and
grid-template-rows, repeat, 3, 1fr.
So here, we're doing what
I just told you not to do.
I am going to set up all of my cards to
have three rows per template card, and
they're each gonna be one fraction high.
So take a look at how that
winds up making our page look.
Not so hot?
Even if we ignore the featured card for
now.
Which is definitely throwing things off,
we can see that we've kind
of got our headlines and
then we've got a grapey huge gap
because that's the fr in 1fr.
We've got some text, that long
text is defining what 1fr is, and
then we have our button that's
the top of the next 1fr.
So that's what's going on here.
We actually do have three sections.
1fr is defined by the tallest section,
which happens to be our paragraph.
And then we just have blank space if
we don't have anything else to fill in.
This is why setting heights for your rows
is not gonna fix that particular problem.
Just doesn't work.
So instead, what we're going to
do is work on our container.
Let me get rid of that card display.
And let's take a look at our container.
So here we have our display grid,
we have our grid template columns.
We've said we want four columns.
With a min max of 200 to 1fr.
And to this I'm going to
add grid template rows,
and I'm just gonna say repeat, 3, 1fr.
Okay, so we're gonna have three rows.
And because this is on the container,
each one of these Lorem ipsum guys here
is going to be in one of those rows.
And then we have an extra row down here on
the bottom that has nothing in it, right?
Because we don't have enough
stuff to put in that third row.
Then I'm gonna update my cards,
and I'm gonna say display grid,
and I'm gonna say grid
template columns 1fr.
And then I'm going to say the magic words,
grid template rows subgrid.
And then grid row span 3.
Okay, so what did I just do here?
So what we've told each one of these
cards to do then is to have one column
refer to the rows that are used
to lay out the web page
rather than any rows that we
declare here on the card.
Take a look at the structure
of the web page itself, and
then have each card span over three rows.
And we've used span 3 here rather than the
number notation because we don't really
know where these cards are gonna wind up.
But wherever they wind up wherever
they start we want them to span over
three rows.
So now we have some alignment here.
So you can see that we have
our headlines are all aligned.
This happens to be the image plus
the paragraphs, they're all aligned.
Our read more buttons they're all aligned.
Why this paragraph is here
with this read more button?
We didn't tell the paragraph where to go,
and so
they were both occupying the same space.
And then down here in our second row,
we wind up with headlines that align,
paragraphs that align,
and buttons that align.
Okay, so let's fix this first card so
that it spans the right number of rows.
So this first featured card here,
we actually wanted it to span enough so
that we can have the cards stacked
on top of each other two at a time.
If each card takes up three rows,
then that means that
our featured card needs to go
from number one to number seven.
So let's put that style on in here.
We're going to say,
Card number one we,
take a look here in our HTML,
our very first card is card number one.
So I'm gonna say .1 and
I'm gonna say grid-column, 1/3.
We want it to take up half the screen,
and grid-row, 1/7.
So our featured item will
now take up seven rows,
And there's the other little
cards here underneath.
So it did in fact work, but we still have
these gigantic gaps inside of these cards,
so that's the next thing to fix.
So what's going on with that?
Well, there's some ways we can tighten
up the space because remember 1fr is
being defined by the tallest
member of whatever is here.
And so one of the ways we can
tighten up that space is by
saying .card greater than sign star.
So what is the star mean in CSS?
Everything, everything, okay?
And what does the greater than sign mean?
>> Parent?
>> Yes, this is for
all of the children of card,
whatever those children are we're
going to turn off their margin.
And that's gonna tighten some
things up here a little bit, okay?
Some help, not a whole lot.
So now what we can do is play around with
some of our heights on our container here.
So right now I have three rows,
each height is one fr.
I'm gonna change that.
And after a lot of thinking about it,
if we said something like .2fr, 1fr,
.1fr, we wind up tightening up our cards a
little bit and they start looking better.
See that?
Okay, so that's gonna make that middle
paragraph a little bit shorter and
tighten up the space between
the headlines and the buttons.
But everything is aligned, so
that was our goal here on these cards.
So does that kinda make sense?
Okay, so to go back and
take a look at this one more time and
sort of review where we are.
What we did was, with our container,
we set up our rows to have a little bit of
height associated with them for
those template rows.
We are having our cards
latch on to those rows and
span over them such that now
things will line across the cards.
That's pretty much what's going on.
>> Is there a reason why there's
two class selectors for one?
>> A great question.
>> Yeah, I was just one of them myself.
>> Thank you, probably because
I was not paying attention and
that first one should not be there,
should just be the second one.
Thank you for pointing that out, awesome.
Okay, so we definitely still have some
spacing issues that are going on here.
When in doubt what do we do?
We go to our dev tools.
So, let's take a look
at this in dev tools.
And I'm going to put this
into full page view, and
I'm going to take a look
at this in dev tools.
Okay, so here's our container.
Woo, look at that.
There's our grid.
And there's our subgrid.
Now, what's causing all
of those big spaces?
Can you see it?
>> All the text from our future.
>> The text from the feature definitely
causing a big gap here, yeah.
But what about up here?
What's causing the big spaces up here?
>> There's one header that has two lines.
>> Right, yeah,
we definitely want those to align.
But look at where these gaps are.
Remember the gaps
are the shaded parts here.
See how the gaps are really
pushing things apart?
So if we scroll down a little bit more,
some of the gaps here are causing a lot
of the gaps that we see on the page.
So this might be a case
where what we wanna do, Is,
Here inside of our CSS I'm
gonna change my container gap,
From 2 rem and
I'm gonna change my card gap to 1 rem.
And that will again, help to tighten
things up a little bit more and so forth.
Why are my top cards so
much longer than my bottom cards?
Anyone have a suggestion on that?
Why are my top cards so
much taller than my bottom cards?
>> Because of that text on the first one.
>> Yeah, cuz the image here is setting the
height of our text for these two cards.
And then this paragraph is setting
the height for our read more buttons here.
That's what's going on.
So these cards on top wind up being much
taller, and these cards down here that
that don't have any of those constraints,
they are much shorter.
So there are some compromises that
we are making here with subgrid.
Make sense?
Kind of sort of?
All right, so this is just
an initial demo here with subgrid
on this sort of artificial
example here of what's going on.
Let's try applying this now to our actual
work that we were doing earlier today.